.TH CHKMAIL 8l "28th April 2015 r1.186
.SH NAME
.B chkmail
- checks the availability of a mail account on a remote IMAP server and 
optionaly prints and or logs the number of messages in the nominated mailboxes.
A warning threshold may be set for the number of messages and messages exceeding
the threshold may be deleted.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBchkmail\fR
[\fB-a \fI<mail_addr\fR]
[\fB-c \fI<config_file>\fR]
[\fB-d\fR]
[\fB-f\fR]
[\fB-i \fI<imap_server>\fR]
[\fB-L \fR]
[\fB-l \fR]
[\fB-m \fI<mailbox>\fR]
[\fB-n \fR]
[\fB-P \fI<passwd>\fR]
[\fB-p \fI<port_no>\fR]
[\fB-u \fI<login_name>\fR]
[\fB-v \fR]
[\fB-w \fI<#_messages>\fR]
[\fB-x \fR]
[\fIconfig_id>\fR] |
[\fB-V \fR]
.br
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B chkmail
is a Bourne shell script which should work equally well on all versions of UNIX,
Linux and Mac OS X.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chkmail
uses "\fBtelnet\fR"
and "\fBexpect\fR"
to connect to an IMAP server and examine nominated mailboxes. The utility
optionally prints the number of messages in each specified mailbox. The
script can
log the presence of oversize mailboxes, advise the owners of the mailbox
regarding the need for good house keeping and/or purge the excess mail.
.LP
I wrote this one after I discovered that a client who was complaining about
POP3 performance on a 1 and 1 server in the cloud, had over 20,000 messages in
her in-boxes, 13.5 thousand of them in a single mailbox. Nothing was ever
being deleted or archived, not even spam. Manipulating the mailboxes
through the Mac-OS X mail client was a nightmare. I needed  a tool that
would monitor the the remote mailboxes and return data that I could feed
into alerts and e-mail reminders.
.B NB .
A short client id can be given which makes it easy to use in an ad hoc fashion
from the terminal. The id is used to look up the details of the mail account
in the configuration file. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
\fB-a \fI<mail_address>\fR
In these days of virtual mail boxes the users mail address is usually the
login name for the IMAP mail account.
The Unix login name is still used where
the user has an account on the box (well it is on my boxes)  and this can be
given here or sent with the \fB-u\fR option below.
.B NB
The command line options supercede the configuration file settings.
.TP 5
.B -c
Use the specified configuration file in preference to the default
\fI"/usr/local/etc/chkmail.cf"\fR.
If no configuration file is found the 
script will attempt to soldier on with whatever information was supplied from
the command line. If all else fails .B chkmail will attempt to check
"\fIINBOX"\fR for the user invoking the script. The IMAP server name
being constructed from the local 
domain (\fIhostname -d\fR).  It would be more sensible to terminate
with syntax message on standard error but this does make some sort of sense
if like me you want a lazy way to count the messages
in your own in-box.
.TP 5
.B -d
Set debug mode on. 
The \fB-x\fR option is set within the shell
and each command in the script is echoed to the console.
.TP 5
\fB-i \fI<imap_server_name>\fR.
The name or IP address of the server to which the 
.B expect 
script should connect.
.TP 5
.B -L
List the available mailboxes for this mail user account. 
.TP 5
.B -l
Use the local syslog facility to log that the check has been made and 
record the number of messages returned.
.TP 5
\fB-m \fI<mailbox>\fR
Count the number of messages in the nominated mailboxes. The option is redundant
if the mailbox id is used.
.TP 5
\fB-n\fR
Notify the user if they have exceeded the warning threshold for the number of
messages in their mail box (see \fB-w\fR option below).
.TP 5 
\fB-P \fI<password>\fR.
The password for the mail user account. It is possible to use this option in combination with the configuration file if you don't want to store 
passwords on disc.
.TP 5
\fB-p \fI<port_number>\fR.
The ports that
.B chkmail
knows how to handle are 143, 993 and 22.
.IP
If port 143 is used 
.B chkmail
will access the mail account using 
.B expect 
and
.B telnet
to send the appropriate
.B IMAP
commands.
.IP
If port 993 is selected
.B chkmail 
will try to use
.B openssl
with 
.BR expect .
.IP
Use of both ports 143 and 993 will be relatively slow and require knowledge of the
mail account password which may be passed on the command line or stored in
.BR chkmail.cf .
Using these options does however have the advantage that no knowledge of the 
back end mail store architecture is required.
.IP
Using 22 (\fBssh\fR)
has the advantage of being much quicker and the user only requires 
.B sudo
root access. At present however only 
.B Courier
mailboxes, as configured by 
.B Plesk
under 
.B CentOS 
.BR 6 ,
are supported.
.TP 5
\fB-s\fR
Force the script to use the imap protocol to contact the mail host.
.TP 5
\fB-u \fI<username>\fR.
The name for the IMAP account login. In reality this duplicates the 
.B -a
option but it just seemed more intuitive to have both. 
.TP 5
.B -v
Set verbose mode on. Without this option 
.B chkmail
reports only on those mail boxes where the number of messages either
equals or exceeds the trigger value for warnings. With the
.B -v
option 
.B chkmail
always reports the checking of a mail box and the number of messages found.
.TP 5
\fB-w\fI <#_no_of messages>\fR
Sets the threshold for the number of messages a mail box may hold before
a warning is issued. If the 
.B -n
option is used warning message will be sent by e-mail to the mail box owner or
the person defined in the configuration file with the \fIalert\fR equate, a
warning is also printed to standard error.
.IP
The warning threshold may also be set in the configuration file but will be
over ridden by the value set here.
.IP
If used with the
.B -x
option the excess messages will be deleted.
.TP 5
\fB-x\fR
To be used with great caution the \fB-x\fR option expunges all messages 
exceeding the warning threshold. The option was introduced when I discovered
that a client had 48.5 thousand messages in an un-monitored INBOX and was 
no longer able to access or delete messages with the locally available mail
clients.
.TP 5
<\fIconfig_id\fR>
The configuration identity is the key to the stanza in the configuration
file which will be used to determine the values to be used by the script.
The configuration equates recognised by the scripts are:
.IP
.nf
.ft CW
addr      Email address to be checked.
imap      IMAP server name or IP.
passwd    Password for the email account.
alert     Recipient address for alerts.
warn      Trigger value for e-mail alerts.
folders   The mailbox folders to be checked.
.ft R
.fi
.TP 5
\fB-V\fR Print the version details and exit.
.SH FILES
.IR chkmail.cf ,
.IR msg_cnt ,
.IR msg_del .
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP
.ft CW
chkmail flash
.ft R
.LP
The id "flash" is looked up in the default configuration file
\fI/usr/local/etc/chkmail.cf\fR. Using the e-mail account name and 
password found there, the script calls an \fBexpect\fR script 
.I "/usr/local/etc/msg_cnt" 
to login to the IMAP server and
get a count of the messages in the nominated mailbox. If the number of
messages exceeds the default of 100 a warning is printed to screen.
.IP
.nf
.ft CW
chkmail -a arthur.pendragon@camelot.co.uk \\
.br
-i imap.mailservice.com -l -p password  -m INBOX.Spam 
.ft R
.fi
.LP
No configuration id has been given so 
\fBchkmail\fR
will only use the command line options.
An IMAP login will be attempted 
on imap.mailservice.com using the user name arthur.pendragon@camelot.co.uk
and the password "password" as given on the command line. The check will
be performed on the folder "INBOX.Spam"and the total number of messages
returned will be logged using the local syslog facility.  A warning will
be printed to screen if the folder holds more than the default value of 100.
.IP
.nf
.ft CW
chkmail  -v -p 993 -w 1000 -x -n dermot 
.ft R
.fi
.LP
The script will lookup the details for "\fIdermot\fR" in the default
configuration file
.IR /usr/local/etc/chkmail.cf .
The account will be accessed using 
.B SSL
(secure sockets layer) and the INBOX, together with any folders specified in
the stanza labelled
.IR dermot ,
will be checked and the number of messages counted.
If there are more than 1000
messages in any folder being checked, the nominated person 
(which may or may not be the account holder) will be notified and requested
to ensure that excess messages are removed. The
.B -x
option will also ensure that messages in excess of 1000 will be deleted.
.SH BUGS
The script is quite crude and has very little, if any,  error checking.
The consequences of unexpected input are untested.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR chkdf ,
.IR chkftpd ,
.IR chkfw ,
.IR chkup ,
.IR msg_cnt ,
.IR msg_del .
.SH AUTHOR
Clifford W Fulford, City Linux. Contact fulford@fulford.net or +44 (0)709 229 5385.
.SH HISTORY
